.TH nls 1 "October 2025" "nicels 0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
nls \- modern directory listing with extended features (replacement for ls)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBnls\fR [\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIPATH\fR]...
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBnls\fR (nicels) is a modern replacement for the \fBls\fR command. It lists information about files and directories with enriched output including icons, colors, Git status, and configurable themes:contentReference[oaicite:1]{index=1}. By default, \fBnls\fR behaves like \fBls\fR, listing the current directory if no \fIPATH\fR is given, and sorting entries alphabetically unless otherwise specified:contentReference[oaicite:2]{index=2}:contentReference[oaicite:3]{index=3}. Additional features include optional Git integration (showing status of files under version control), tree-view directory listings, and customizable output format and color schemes.

.SH OPTIONS
The command-line options are grouped by functionality as below. Short (single-letter) options can be combined (e.g. \fB-la\fR for long format with all files). For full effect, ensure your terminal supports the needed colors and symbols.

.SS Layout Options
.TP 
.B "\-l, \-\-long"
Use a long listing format (detailed view with columns for permissions, owners, size, date, etc.):contentReference[oaicite:4]{index=4}.
.TP 
.B "\-1, \-\-one-per-line"
List one file per line (single-column output):contentReference[oaicite:5]{index=5}.
.TP 
.B \-x
List entries by lines instead of by columns (horizontal sorting across rows):contentReference[oaicite:6]{index=6}.
.TP 
.B \-C
List entries by columns (vertical columns, the default behavior):contentReference[oaicite:7]{index=7}.
.TP 
\fB\-\-format=\fIWORD\fR
Explicitly use a given output format. \fIWORD\fR can be one of **vertical**, **horizontal**, **long**, **single-column**, or **comma** (you may also use abbreviations like **-x**, **-l**, **-1**, **-m** here):contentReference[oaicite:8]{index=8}:contentReference[oaicite:9]{index=9}. For example, `--format=long` is equivalent to `-l`. Default format is **vertical** (columns).
.TP 
.B \-\-header
Print a header with directory name and column labels in long listings. By default, a directory heading is shown only if multiple paths are listed; this option forces a header (including column titles like "Mode", "Owner", etc.) even for single directories:contentReference[oaicite:10]{index=10}:contentReference[oaicite:11]{index=11}.
.TP 
.B \-m
Fill the width with a comma-separated list of entries (stream output separated by commas):contentReference[oaicite:12]{index=12}:contentReference[oaicite:13]{index=13}.
.TP 
\fB\-T, \-\-tabsize\fR \fICOLS\fR
Assume tab stops every \fICOLS\fR columns (default 8) when aligning output:contentReference[oaicite:14]{index=14}. Useful for aligning tab-separated fields in long listings. \fICOLS\fR must be non-negative.
.TP 
\fB\-w, \-\-width\fR \fICOLS\fR
Set the output width to \fICOLS\fR columns. By default, \fBnls\fR detects the terminal width; use \fB--width=0\fR for no limit:contentReference[oaicite:15]{index=15}.
.TP 
.B "\-R, \-\-recursive"
Recursively list subdirectories in flat format (like \fBls \-R\fR). This is distinct from \fB\-\-tree\fR and cannot be combined with it.
.TP 
\fB\-\-tree[=\fIDEPTH\fR]\fR
Recursively list directories in a tree view. Optionally limit recursion to \fIDEPTH\fR levels (0 means no limit):contentReference[oaicite:16]{index=16}:contentReference[oaicite:17]{index=17}. For example, \fB--tree=2\fR lists two levels deep. If \fIDEFTH\fR is not provided, it defaults to 0 (fully recursive).
.TP 
\fB\-\-report[=\fIWORD\fR]\fR
Show a summary report after listing. \fIWORD\fR can be **short** or **long**, defaulting to **long** if omitted:contentReference[oaicite:18]{index=18}:contentReference[oaicite:19]{index=19}. A "short" report might include just totals (e.g. number of files and directories), whereas "long" could provide more detailed summary. If this option is given without a value, it defaults to long report.
.TP 
.B \-\-zero
End each output line with a null character (ASCII 0) instead of a newline:contentReference[oaicite:20]{index=20}. Useful for piping output into programs that expect NUL-separated names.

.SS Filtering Options
.TP 
.B "\-a, \-\-all"
Do not ignore entries starting with ‘.’ (include hidden files):contentReference[oaicite:21]{index=21}.
.TP 
.B "\-A, \-\-almost-all"
Include hidden entries except for ‘.’ and ‘..’:contentReference[oaicite:22]{index=22}.
.TP 
.B "\-d, \-\-dirs"
Show only directories, not regular files:contentReference[oaicite:23]{index=23}.
.TP 
.B "\-f, \-\-files"
Show only files, not directories:contentReference[oaicite:24]{index=24}.
.TP 
.B "\-B, \-\-ignore-backups"
Omit entries ending with ‘~’ (backup files):contentReference[oaicite:25]{index=25}.
.TP 
\fB\-\-hide\fR \fIPATTERN\fR...
Do not list entries that match the shell wildcard \fIPATTERN\fR:contentReference[oaicite:26]{index=26}. Patterns apply to filenames (e.g. `--hide="*.bak"`). This is overridden by \fB-a\fR or \fB-A\fR (which show all files).
.TP 
\fB\-I, \-\-ignore\fR \fIPATTERN\fR...
Like \fB--hide\fR, but specifically ignore entries matching \fIPATTERN\fR:contentReference[oaicite:27]{index=27}. Multiple patterns can be provided. (Note: In GNU ls, `-I` ignores patterns even with `-a`, but here `-a`/`-A` will show all files regardless.)

.SS Sorting Options
.TP 
.B \-t 
Sort by modification time (newest first):contentReference[oaicite:28]{index=28}.
.TP 
.B \-S 
Sort by file size (largest first):contentReference[oaicite:29]{index=29}.
.TP 
.B \-X 
Sort by file extension (alphabetically by extension):contentReference[oaicite:30]{index=30}.
.TP 
.B \-U 
Do not sort; list entries in directory order (unsorted):contentReference[oaicite:31]{index=31}.
.TP 
.B "\-r, \-\-reverse"
Reverse the sorting order (e.g. list smallest or oldest first instead):contentReference[oaicite:32]{index=32}.
.TP 
\fB\-\-sort=\fIWORD\fR
Sort by the specified criterion \fIWORD\fR instead of name:contentReference[oaicite:33]{index=33}. Valid \fIWORD\fR values are **name**, **time** (modification time), **size**, **extension**, or **none** (for no sorting). Defaults to **name** if this option isn’t used.
.TP 
.B "\-\-sd, \-\-sort-dirs, \-\-group-directories-first"
Sort directories before files:contentReference[oaicite:34]{index=34}. Directories will be listed first in each listing, then files.
.TP 
.B "\-\-sf, \-\-sort-files"
Sort files first (the inverse of the above):contentReference[oaicite:35]{index=35}, listing regular files before directories.
.TP 
.B "\-\-df, \-\-dots-first"
Sort "dot" files (and dot directories) first:contentReference[oaicite:36]{index=36}. Entries beginning with '.' will appear before other names in each directory.

.SS Appearance Options
.TP 
.B "\-b, \-\-escape"
Print C-style escape sequences for nongraphic characters:contentReference[oaicite:37]{index=37}. (For example, newline as `\n`, tab as `\t`, etc., to make control characters visible.)
.TP 
.B "\-N, \-\-literal"
Output entry names without quoting or escaping:contentReference[oaicite:38]{index=38}. All characters are output as-is (this is the default quoting style in nls).
.TP 
.B "\-Q, \-\-quote-name"
Enclose each entry name in double quotes:contentReference[oaicite:39]{index=39}. This is equivalent to `--quoting-style=c` (C language style quoting).
.TP 
\fB\-\-quoting-style=\fIWORD\fR
Use quoting style \fIWORD\fR for entry names:contentReference[oaicite:40]{index=40}. Supported styles: **literal** (no quotes, no escaping – same as `-N`), **locale** (locale-specific quoting), **shell** (escape characters for shell, quote if whitespace), **shell-always**, **shell-escape**, **shell-escape-always**, **c** (C-style like `-Q`), or **escape** (escape non-graphic chars). Default is **literal**:contentReference[oaicite:41]{index=41}:contentReference[oaicite:42]{index=42}. The environment variable `QUOTING_STYLE` can also set a default style on startup.
.TP 
.B \-p
Append a `/' indicator to directory names:contentReference[oaicite:43]{index=43} (marks directories with a trailing slash).
.TP 
\fB\-\-indicator-style=\fISTYLE\fR
Append file-type indicators to names using style \fISTYLE\fR:contentReference[oaicite:44]{index=44}. Valid styles: **none** (no indicator), **slash** (directories only, marked with `/` – same as `-p`). Default is **slash**.
.TP 
.B "\-\-no-icons, \-\-without-icons"
Disable icons in output:contentReference[oaicite:45]{index=45}. By default, nls may display file-type icons or symbols; this option turns that off (useful if your font or environment doesn’t support the icons).
.TP 
.B \-\-no-color
Produce output with no ANSI color codes:contentReference[oaicite:46]{index=46}. This forces monochrome output (same as `--color=never`).
.TP 
\fB\-\-color=\fIWHEN\fR
Colorize the output according to file type or extension. \fIWHEN\fR can be **auto**, **always**, or **never**:contentReference[oaicite:47]{index=47}. **auto** (default) means color output only if the output is a terminal (tty) and not disabled by `NO_COLOR` env var:contentReference[oaicite:48]{index=48}; **always** forces color codes even if output is piped; **never** disables color entirely:contentReference[oaicite:49]{index=49}. (See **Environment** below for `LS_COLORS` usage.)
.TP 
\fB\-\-theme\fR \fINAME\fR
Use theme \fINAME\fR for colors and icons:contentReference[oaicite:50]{index=50}:contentReference[oaicite:51]{index=51}. Themes live inside the configuration database (`NLS.sqlite3`). The supplied name matches the entry stored in the database (case-sensitive). For backward compatibility, suffixes “_theme” or “.yaml” are ignored (e.g. `--theme=light` and `--theme=light_theme` refer to the same theme). An error is reported if the theme is not found:contentReference[oaicite:52]{index=52}:contentReference[oaicite:53]{index=53}.
.TP 
.B \-\-light
Use the light color scheme:contentReference[oaicite:54]{index=54}. This sets the default theme to a light background variant (overriding auto-detection).
.TP 
.B \-\-dark
Use the dark color scheme:contentReference[oaicite:55]{index=55}. Forces dark theme (if not set, the default theme is applied or auto-detected).
.TP 
.B "\-q, \-\-hide-control-chars"
Show `?` instead of non-graphic (control) characters in file names:contentReference[oaicite:56]{index=56}. This makes unprintable characters visible as question marks.
.TP 
.B \-\-show-control-chars
Display non-printable characters as-is (opposite of `-q`):contentReference[oaicite:57]{index=57}. By default, nls will **not** hide control chars (unless POSIX mode or `-q` is used).
.TP 
\fB\-\-time-style=\fIFORMAT\fR
Use specified \fIFORMAT\fR for displaying timestamps:contentReference[oaicite:58]{index=58}. Recognized formats include **full-iso**, **long-iso**, **iso**, **locale**, **local** (a variant of locale; default), or a custom format starting with `+` as in the \fBdate(1)\fR command:contentReference[oaicite:59]{index=59}:contentReference[oaicite:60]{index=60}. If a custom format contains a newline, the part after newline is used for recent dates. Prefixing a style with `posix-` applies it only when not in the POSIX locale:contentReference[oaicite:61]{index=61}. (The `TIME_STYLE` environment variable can also set a default format:contentReference[oaicite:62]{index=62}.) Default is **local** time format.
.TP 
.B \-\-full-time
Combination of `-l --time-style=full-iso`:contentReference[oaicite:63]{index=63}. Displays time in full ISO 8601 format (down to seconds and timezone) in a long listing.
.TP 
.B \-\-hyperlink
Output file names as clickable hyperlinks (OSC 8 ANSI hyperlinks) in supporting terminals:contentReference[oaicite:64]{index=64}:contentReference[oaicite:65]{index=65}. This encodes each file path so that clicking it in a compatible terminal opens the file or directory.

.SS Information Options
.TP 
.B "\-i, \-\-inode"
Show each file’s inode number in the listing:contentReference[oaicite:66]{index=66}.
.TP 
.B \-o 
Use a long listing format like `-l`, but omit the group information:contentReference[oaicite:67]{index=67}. (Equivalent to `-l --no-group` in effect.)
.TP 
.B \-g 
Like `-l`, but omit the owner information:contentReference[oaicite:68]{index=68}. (This is a legacy BSD `ls` option; note `-g` alone is not “group directories first” here.)
.TP 
.B "\-G, \-\-no-group"
Do not show group information in long format listings:contentReference[oaicite:69]{index=69}.
.TP 
.B "\-n, \-\-numeric-uid-gid"
Like `-l`, but list numeric UIDs and GIDs instead of names:contentReference[oaicite:70]{index=70}.
.TP 
.B "\-\-bytes, \-\-non-human-readable"
Display file sizes in bytes, without any scaling or unit suffix:contentReference[oaicite:71]{index=71}. By default, in long format, file sizes are human-readable (using KB, MB, etc., or block counts if `--block-size` is used). This option forces raw byte counts.
.TP 
.B "\-s, \-\-size"
Show the allocated size of each file in blocks:contentReference[oaicite:72]{index=72} (alongside the file name or in the long listing). This prints a block count column (`ls -s` style). The default block size is 1KiB (1024 bytes) unless overridden (see `--block-size`).
.TP 
\fB\-\-block-size=\fISIZE\fR
Scale file sizes to \fISIZE\fR units when printing them:contentReference[oaicite:73]{index=73}. Only affects long listings (and possibly the `-s` size column). \fISIZE\fR can be specified with a suffix: e.g. **K**, **M**, **G** (powers of 1024) or **KB**, **MB** (powers of 1000). You may also use binary prefixes like **KiB**, **MiB**, etc.:contentReference[oaicite:74]{index=74}:contentReference[oaicite:75]{index=75}. For example, `--block-size=1M` will show sizes in units of 1,048,576 bytes. (If \fISIZE\fR is 0 or not a number, an error is reported.) This option overrides any BLOCK_SIZE environment variable (if applicable).
.TP 
.B "\-L, \-\-dereference"
For symbolic links, list information for the file they reference (the target), rather than the link itself:contentReference[oaicite:76]{index=76}. (Same as \fBls -L\fR.)
.TP 
.B "\-\-gs, \-\-git-status"
Show Git status alongside each file:contentReference[oaicite:77]{index=77}. If the directory is a Git repository, this adds a column or indicator for Git modification state (e.g. modified, untracked, etc.). This feature requires libgit2 support:contentReference[oaicite:78]{index=78}.
.TP 
.B "\-\-perf-debug"
Enable performance diagnostics (debugging mode):contentReference[oaicite:79]{index=79}. This may log timing information about internal operations to stderr for troubleshooting.

.PP 
All of the above options can be combined to tailor the output. For example, using \fB--color=always\fR together with \fB--hyperlink\fR is supported. The **--help** option (or \fB-h\fR) will display a usage summary similar to the above, and **--version** will show the program version.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect \fBnls\fR:

.TP 
.B NLS_DATA_DIR 
If set, specifies a directory to search for the configuration database before any other default locations:contentReference[oaicite:80]{index=80}. This allows using a custom `NLS.sqlite3` from an alternate location. When \fBNLS_DATA_DIR\fR is set, per-user overrides are ignored for the resources provided there:contentReference[oaicite:81]{index=81}.
.TP 
.B LS_COLORS 
Defines color codes for file types, as used by GNU ls and dircolors:contentReference[oaicite:82]{index=82}. \fBnls\fR will use this if \fB--color\fR is enabled (or auto) to apply file type colors:contentReference[oaicite:83]{index=83}. Set via the \fBdircolors(1)\fR command or manually, it is a colon-separated list of file pattern color mappings. If not set, \fBnls\fR uses the defaults embedded in the configuration database for colors.
.TP 
.B NO_COLOR 
If this variable is present in the environment, \fBnls\fR will disable colored output entirely:contentReference[oaicite:84]{index=84}. This overrides \fB--color=auto\fR (effectively treating it as “never”). This is a standard convention to respect users who prefer no color in output.
.TP 
.B TIME_STYLE 
If set, provides a default time display style (format) for listings:contentReference[oaicite:85]{index=85}. Its value should match one of the formats accepted by \fB--time-style\fR (e.g. "full-iso", "long-iso", or a custom `+FORMAT`). If not specified, nls uses "local" time style by default:contentReference[oaicite:86]{index=86}. (Note: `posix-` prefix in this variable’s value will be honored outside the POSIX locale:contentReference[oaicite:87]{index=87}.)
.TP 
.B QUOTING_STYLE 
Sets the default quoting style for filenames:contentReference[oaicite:88]{index=88}. Valid values are the same as for the \fB--quoting-style\fR option (e.g. "literal", "shell", "c", etc.). If this variable is set, nls will apply the specified quoting style unless overridden by command-line options.
.TP 
.B POSIXLY_CORRECT 
If set, \fBnls\fR may enable POSIX compatibility modes for certain behaviors. For example, when this is present, time styles prefixed with "posix-" will be in effect (unless the locale is POSIX/C). It may also influence sorting or quoting to adhere strictly to POSIX `ls` rules. (Note: This variable is recognized for compatibility; its exact effects in nls are minimal and primarily pertain to time style handling:contentReference[oaicite:89]{index=89}.)

.PP 
On Windows, \fBnls\fR additionally looks for `NLS.sqlite3` under `%APPDATA%\\nicels\\DB` (for per-user config) and `%PROGRAMDATA%\\nicels\\DB` for system-wide defaults, unless overridden by \fBNLS_DATA_DIR\fR:contentReference[oaicite:90]{index=90}. `%USERPROFILE%` is used as a fallback if `%APPDATA%` is not defined. These environment specifics are mainly for locating the database and do not typically require manual intervention.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP 
The following examples illustrate common usage of \fBnls\fR:

.IP "\fB1.\fR"
List all files (including hidden) in the current directory, using a long listing with Git status and a summary report:
.RS
.nf
$ nls \-laA \-\-gs \-\-header \-\-report=long
.fi
.RE
This will produce a detailed, colored listing of the current directory (including dotfiles), with an extra column showing Git status for each file, a header line with column labels, and a summary at the end:contentReference[oaicite:91]{index=91}.

.IP "2."
Recursively list a directory in tree form, limiting depth to 2:
.RS
.nf
$ nls \-\-tree=2 ~/projects
.fi
.RE
This will display the contents of `~/projects` and its subdirectories up to two levels deep, in a tree layout where subdirectories are indented. Deeper levels are not expanded (they would be indicated with a marker if applicable).

.IP "3."
Use filtering options to list only directories (no files) in the current directory:
.RS
.nf
$ nls \-d .
.fi
.RE
Combining flags can refine output. For example, \fBnls -d -lA\fR would list only directories in long format, including hidden ones (but omitting “.” and “..”).

.IP "4."
Copy the default configuration database to your user config directory:
.RS
.nf
$ nls \-\-copy-config
.fi
.RE
This will populate your `~/.nicels/DB/NLS.sqlite3` (on Linux/macOS) or `%APPDATA%\\nicels\\DB\\NLS.sqlite3` (on Windows) with the default configuration database if it does not already exist. It prints which files were copied or skipped and then exits:contentReference[oaicite:92]{index=92}:contentReference[oaicite:93]{index=93}.

.IP "5."
Show database entries for YAML files, limiting the output with a wildcard:
.RS
.nf
$ nls db \-\-show-files \-\-name "*.yaml"
.fi
.RE
This filters the merged configuration database to entries whose names match the supplied pattern (case-insensitive):contentReference[oaicite:91]{index=91}.

.SH AUTHOR
\fBnls\fR was developed by Dmitry K. (GitHub user **dm17ryk**). It is an open-source project available on GitHub. Feedback, bug reports, and contributions are welcome via the project’s issue tracker.

.SH SEE\ ALSO
\fBls(1)\fR, \fBtree(1)\fR, \fBgit(1)\fR (especially “git status”), \fBdate(1)\fR (for time format strings), \fBdircolors(1)\fR. 
.\" (The nls tool integrates aspects of these commands: it is largely a drop-in replacement for ls with additional features inspired by tree and git.)
